---
title: "Sub-Goal: Livelihoods"
name: "Livelihoods"
bg_image: "/images/banners/shipping-containers.jpg"
id: "LIV"
description: "This sub-goal describes livelihood quantity and quality for people living on the coast. Livelihoods includes the number of jobs and the per capita average annual wages."
---

This sub-goal describes livelihood quantity and quality for people living on the coast. Livelihoods includes two equally important sub-components, the number of jobs, which is a proxy for livelihood quantity, and the per capita average annual wages, which is a proxy for job quality.

### Ideal Approach

Ideally, this sub-goal would speak to the quality and quantity of marine jobs in an area. It would encompass all the marine sectors that supply jobs and wages to coastal communities, incorporating information on the sustainability of different sectors while also telling about the working conditions and job satisfaction. The jobs and revenue produced from marine-related industries directly benefit those who are employed, and also those who gain indirect value from related economic and social impacts of a stable coastal economy, such as community identity and tax revenue. You should capture the indirect as well as direct benefits from jobs, wages and revenue from coastal communities.

In your assessment, there is the opportunity to study the behavior of economic trends in your area. You can examine time-series with greater detail and, for example, establish a different time-periods that reflect economic cycles in your area, or even process the data to eliminate the “noise” from fluctuations and capture more persistent trends.

> You will most likely simplify the models from the global assessments. Models in the global assessments adjust for currency differences using the the Consumer Price Index and Purchasing Power Parity, which you likely will not need to do.

### Practical Guidance

The first step of this goal is to **identify the marine-related sectors in your area**. These sectors are important because the Livelihoods goal includes information about jobs and wages for those sectors. There are jobs that are directly connected to the marine environment, such as shipping, fishing, longshore workers, but also some that are connected indirectly, such as suppliers and supporting industries. For example, the sectors for which data were found in global assessments included tourism, commercial fishing, marine mammal watching, aquarium fishing, water and tidal energy jobs, mariculture, transportation and shipping, ports and harbors, ship and boatbuilding.

After you have identified which jobs are in your area, you will want to find some **measure of their direct and indirect benefits**. Direct benefits of jobs include the number of jobs in each area, and the wages or income for such jobs. You could find such information from you local national statistical office, or economics bureaus, for example. Indirect benefits of these jobs to the local communities are calculated through the use of economic multipliers, with which you can attempt to estimate the revenue generated by jobs more broadly associated with marine sectors. It’s encouraged to use economic multipliers from the literature.

> One example to use economic multipliers is to multiply the number of fishermen by a multiplier to estimate larger economic effects, ranging from gear manufacturing companies to restaurants and movie theaters where the fishermen spend their income.

Next you must think about how to use the data to infer quality and quantity of jobs. Do you have data through time so that you can see how the number of jobs or the wages per sector have changed over time? If all of the sectors change in the same way, for instance, this might show broader economic trends that you should account for.

It is highly recommended that you set the **reference point** for jobs as a temporal comparison (eg. the number of jobs five years before), and for for wages as a spatial comparison (eg. highest observed value across reporting units). Comparing the number of jobs across different places, for instance, would require at the very least adjusting values by the size of the workforce in each location.

