---
title: "Sub-Goal: Livelihoods"
name: "Livelihoods"
bg_image: "/images/banners/shipping-containers.jpg"
id: "LIV"
description: "This sub-goal describes livelihood quantity and quality for people living on the coast. Livelihoods includes the number of jobs and the per capita average annual wages."
---

This sub-goal describes livelihood quantity and quality for people living on the coast. Livelihoods includes two equally important sub-components, the number of jobs, which is a proxy for livelihood quantity, and the per capita average annual wages, which is a proxy for job quality.

A score of 100 indicates that a coastal region has maximized the quantity and quality of jobs in the marine sector.  

Before embarking on the Livelihoods subgoal, consider how you want to structure the larger goal. The global assessment is composed of two equally important sub-goals, livelihoods and economies, which are assessed across as many marine-related sectors as possible. Livelihoods includes two equally important sub-components, the number of jobs, which is a proxy for livelihood quantity, and the per capita average annual wages, which is a proxy for job quality. Economies is composed of a single component, revenue. We track the two halves of this goal separately because the number and quality of jobs and the amount of revenue produced are both of considerable interest to stakeholders and governments, and could show very different patterns in some cases (e.g., high revenue sectors do not necessarily provide large employment opportunities). The status of the livelihoods and economies goal is the average of the livelihoods and economies subgoals.

> The marine-related industries that provide jobs and revenue often provide multiple benefits which are accounted for in different OHI goals. For example, the quantity of food from wild-caught fisheries and mariculture is included in the Food Provision goal; participation in tourism activities is accounted for in the Tourism and Recreation goal. The quantity and quality of jobs is captured in the Livelihoods subgoal.

#### Practical Guidance

*_STEP 1: Determine the sectors_*

The first step of this goal is to **identify the marine-related sectors in your area**. These sectors are important because the Livelihoods goal includes information about jobs and wages for those sectors. There are jobs that are directly connected to the marine environment, such as shipping, fishing, longshore workers, but also some that are connected indirectly, such as suppliers and supporting industries. For example, the sectors for which data were found in global assessments included tourism, commercial fishing, marine mammal watching, aquarium fishing, water and tidal energy jobs, mariculture, transportation and shipping, ports and harbors, ship and boatbuilding.

> You will need to determine whether to include industries that are not considered sustainable, such as oil and gas extraction. It is also important to determine whether to include industries that do no rely on healthy oceans to thrive, such as wind/wave energy, shipping, and boat-building. However, these industries may employ many people and generate large revenue for a region. Ultimately, whether and how to include these industries is a decision that should be made on a case-by-case basis by the individual OHI+ group. For the global assessment we excluded sectors that are not considered sustainable, but decided to include sectors that do not depend on a healthy ocean.

*_STEP 2: Find the data_*

After you have identified which jobs are in your area, you will want to find some **measure of their direct and indirect benefits**. Direct benefits of jobs include the number of jobs in each area, and the wages or income for such jobs. You could find such information from you local national statistical office, or economics bureaus, for example. Indirect benefits of these jobs to the local communities are calculated through the use of economic multipliers, with which you can attempt to estimate the revenue generated by jobs more broadly associated with marine sectors. It’s encouraged to use economic multipliers from the literature.

> One example to use economic multipliers is to multiply the number of fishermen by a multiplier to estimate larger economic effects, ranging from gear manufacturing companies to restaurants and movie theaters where the fishermen spend their income.

In addition to the quantity of marine jobs in an area, this sub-goal should incorporate the quality of the jobs. The global assessment uses wages as a metric of quality, but other information is also relevant such as the sustainability of different sectors as well as teh the working conditions and job satisfaction. 

*_STEP 3: Identify the reference point_*

The reference point for this sub-goal is often a **temporal reference point** that compares current livelihoods to past livelihoods in the same region. In this case, the goal is to maintain the quantity and quality of marine-related jobs year after year. Another approach would be to use locally established target for growth. 

*_STEP 4: Other helpful information_*

In your assessment, there is the opportunity to study the behavior of economic trends in your area. You can examine time-series with greater detail and, for example, establish a different time-periods that reflect economic cycles in your area, or even process the data to eliminate the “noise” from fluctuations and capture more persistent trends. This may be useful if there is a lot of uncertainty, or high variation in the data. For example, a sporadic event such as a large storm may negatively impact a year's revenue, but this may not accurately reflect longer term patterns. 

It may be adviseable to adjust the reference point to track the overall job market, such that the Livelihoods goal will not be penalized if the number of jobs lost is consistent with the number of jobs lost throughout the country.

### Examples of the Approach
{{< csvTable path="tables/livlihoods.csv" sep=";" >}}
