---
title: "Goal: Tourism and Recreation"
name: "Tourism and Recreation"
bg_image: "/images/banners/beach.jpg"
id: "TR"
icon: "/images/goal-icons/tourism-and-recreation.svg"
description: "This goal captures the value that people hold for experiencing and enjoying coastal areas. A score of 100 means a region utilizes its full recreational potential without harming the ecosystem."
color: "#A9B646"
weight: 7
---

Tourism and recreation in coastal areas is a major component of thriving coastal communities and a measure of how much people value ocean systems, i.e. by traveling to coastal and ocean areas. A score of 100 means a region sustainably realizes its full recreational potential.


> This goal is not about the revenue or livelihoods that are generated by tourism and recreation (that is captured in other goals) but instead captures the value that people have for experiencing and enjoying coastal areas. 

#### Practial Guidance

This goal can take many different directions and draw from a wide range of data sources. It is encouraged to think creatively and to look at what other OHI+ assessments have done when developing this goal model. For example, in the Brazil Assessment the density of hotel employees per state was used as a metric to determine how well visited coastal areas were.

A good starting point is to consider how people use and enjoy the ocean in your region and then try to determine the information that could capture this. 

For example, you may be able to find information describing the number of visitors to surf areas, beaches, hiking trails, etc.. Or, the number of people buying fishing licences or parking passes. 

Other types of information that could be useful, include: boat rentals, resort registries, whale watching and bird watching tours. Social media posts could be a rich data source, but will take considerable skill to harvest and analyze. General information such as whether people have access to beaches, boating areas, or to surfing spots could be useful. Are tourism-related industries (eg. hotel employment, restaurant) increasing or decreasing?

The best way to represent the sustainability term for this goal is to use a local indicator or a measure of tourism sustainability or competitiveness. Otherwise use the TTCI value from the Global 2013 assessment for the study area (applied evenly across all regions).

The reference point used will depend upon the types of data. Does your country have industry growth rate targets? Are there measures on sustainable levels of tourism and recreational activities based on ecological factors? Do you want to increase tourism, or instead ensure it does not decline?

### Examples of the Approach
{{< csvTable path="tables/tourism-and-recreation.csv"  sep=";" >}}
