---
title: "Goal: Tourism and Recreation"
name: "Tourism and Recreation"
card_image: "/images/methodology/goals/tourism-and-recreation/card.jpg"
bg_image: "/images/methodology/goals/tourism-and-recreation/banner.jpg"
---


Tourism and recreation in coastal areas is a major component of thriving coastal communities and a measure of how much people value ocean systems, i.e. by traveling to coastal and ocean areas. This goal is not about the revenue or livelihoods that are generated by tourism and recreation (that is captured in the livelihoods goal, section 6F above) but instead captures the value that people have for experiencing and enjoying coastal areas. A score of 100 means a region utilizes its full recreational potential without harming the ecosystem.

**Ideal Approach**

Ideally, you would find information for how the ocean in your area is used and enjoyed by local residents and tourists alike. How many international or domestic visitors? When are they visiting? How long are they staying? What activities are they enjoying? You model should capture the the full range of values and touristic and recreational activities. A measure of sustainability should also be included in the model. The type of reference point used will depend on the data available.

**Practical Guidance**

First look for information that directly reflect how people enjoy the ocean, such as boat rentals, resort registries, whale watching etc. If you can’t find information on visitors, look for proxy data that are indirectly related. For example, do people have access to boating areas, or to surfing spots? Are tourism-related industries (eg. hotel employment, restaurant) increasing or decreasing?

This goal demonstrates the flexibility of the OHI+ approach and will necessarily draw from different data sources than the Global Assessment. It is encouraged to to think creatively and to look at what other OHI+ assessments have done when developing this goal model. For example, in the Brazil Assessment the density of hotel employees per state was used as a metric to determine how well touristed coastal areas were. This was better than using international travel information, as was used in the Global Assessment, because for a large country like Brazil, internal travel would not have been accounted for.

The best way to represent the sustainability term for this goal is to use a local indicator or a measure of tourism sustainability or competitiveness. Otherwise use the TTCI value from the Global 2013 assessment for the study area (applied evenly across all regions).

The reference point used will depend upon the types of data. Does your country have industry growth rate targets? Are there measures on sustainable levels of tourism and recreational activities based on ecological factors? Do you want to increase tourism, or instead ensure it does not decline?




